the United States is stepping up its
opposition to Israel's plans to launch a
full-scale assault on the city of Rafa
in southern Kaza President Joe Biden now
saying that he would not send certain
weapons to Israel if it invades
population centers and that he regretted
that Palestinian civilians had been
killed by us made bombs Israel is
pressing ahead with its strikes on Hamas
in response to the October 7th Terror
attacks a limited operation just short
of an invasion
that is what US officials are calling
Israel's actions in
Rafa this footage released by the
Israeli military on Wednesday shows
troops pressing forward with its
offensive on Rafa Israel says it's part
of its campaign to eliminate
Hamas We are continuing on our mission
in Rafa as part of the war aims because
the last four um the last four
battalions of hamasa there we will
destroy them Israeli forces have ordered
the evacuation of more than a 100,000
Palestinians from parts of Rafa ahead of
its
operations they've been directed to
places like moazi where a squalled
makeshift tent camp has been set up the
UN says the site isn't ready to shelter
people the Israeli military has closed
the Rafa border crossing It Now controls
all routes in or out of Gaza in response
Israel's closest Ally and Main military
supplier the US has paused some weapon
shipments it's also reviewing other
military aid as Secretary of Defense
Lloyd Austin told lawmakers at a hearing
that was briefly interrupted by po
Palestinian
protesters we're going to continue to do
what's necessary to ensure that Israel
has the means to defend itself uh but
that said uh we are currently reviewing
some near-term security assistance
shipments uh in the context of unfolding
in events uh in Rafa the United States
is still pushing for a ceasefire deal
Hamas agreed to a proposal from Egypt
and Qatar this week but Israel says its
demands have not been met now that
Israeli forces have entered Rafa hopes
for a potential pause in the fighting
are hanging in the
balance let's take a closer look at the
situation in Rafa we have Sam rose with
the UN relief Agency for Palestinians
unra joining us now thank you so much
for taking the time um it's really stay
or go this is a a tough decision that
people in Rafa are having to make once
again can you tell us a little bit about
what you are seeing
there yes absolutely CLA thanks for
having me on I mean the situation in
Rafa today is as difficult as it's been
since the 7th of October people are
faced with constant shelling constant
bombardments it's a very dist dressed a
very vulnerable population both inside
and outside of the evacuation zones we
have about one and a half million people
inside Rafa we estimate that 100,000 of
them have already uh up to 100,000 of
them have have already moved given what
they're they're experiencing so a very
desperate situation a very scared a very
vulnerable
population and just for some
clarification for our audience Israel
has said that it's evacuating people in
the eastern part of
can you tell us are people staying put
in in other parts of the city for
now yeah absolutely I mean Israel has
declared an evacuation zone of about
100,000 people we are witnessing people
leaving from inside that zone but also
people from outside of the evacuation
Zone where we are which is about 3 kmet
West of the evacuation Zone we see some
of the areas thinning out we see some
people transiting as well as areas as as
t as plots for tents and Shacks open up
people move in and then a few hours
later as the bombardment intensifies
they they move on again so it's people
on the Move constantly from inside and
from outside of that evacuation area as
people fear the worst I want to ask you
about the conditions in the places
they're heading some of these uh what
Israel calls humanitarian zones is it
clear from what you're hearing whether
there is in fact enough shelter food and
water for people when they do arrive
there
no there is not enough the conditions
are are atrocious the conditions are
squalid there are essentially two areas
that people are being told are safe
areas these are masasi the sandunes
essentially that aren't fit for human
habitation there's no ability to access
Water Sanitation you can see the clips
on your your screen right now these are
desperate desperate areas the other
areas that people are being pushed told
to go to a conun which has been subject
to an intense and Savage bombardment
over the past several weeks people there
going back to the bombed out ruins of of
homes and buildings faced with a high
risk of unexploded bombs unexploded
ordinance so these are the choices that
people are are facing or they stay where
they are and they they they risk uh what
they've seen happen in other parts of
Gaza repeatedly over the past seven
months now just before I let you go I'd
like to get a update on the aid
situation Israel says it opened the K
Shalom Crossing on Wednesday and unra
initially said that it couldn't receive
Aid there because of continued
bombardments in the area is that still
the case or are we now seeing
humanitarian Aid entering
there that remains the case in relation
to rash Rafa and and Karam Shalom
absolutely the crossing the Israeli side
of the crossing was open on Wednesday
yesterday but it but it wasn't
functioning no ability for for for unra
the largest Agency for any Aid agencies
to enter that area and bring uh and
bring those supplies out and two real
reasons for that one are the security
conditions on the ground this is in the
midst of an intense military operation
so just the practicalities of doing that
very very difficult but the other one
and and a point I'd like to leave you
with is is in relation to fuel no fuel
has come into Gaza since since since the
weekend and without that fuel we simply
wouldn't be able to move those those
goods around but more importantly than
moving the goods around it's our ability
to power water wells hospitals
electricity for health centers and
generators so no fuel no Goods coming
into Gaza unfortunately again today at
least not through Rafa karum Shalom so
Rose thank you so much for that update
that is Sam rose with
onra our correspondent in Jerusalem is
Tanya krer we heard there about a
suspended shipment of weapons President
Biden saying he'll stop sending weapons
to Israel if it launch is a full scale
assault on Rafa how's that being
received where you
are I mean this is uh been very closely
watched here and one well-known
commentator here wrote in one of the
main newspapers that this is uh it just
shows the magnitude of the crisis
between uh the two uh countries now in
general uh Israelis see that with a bit
of frustration because they say it
should not be Israel uh that is not
getting the weapons but it should be all
directed you know at Hamas they should
be the ones uh being uh sanctioned in a
way and also it is seen of course that
this might create problems for the
negotiations that are ongoing uh in kir
as it openly questions the relationship
between uh Israel and the United States
now we've been hearing about this
particular shipment we're talking here
about 3,500 bombs heavyweight bombs
among them these uh 2,000 or 900
kilogram bombs uh uh that are not to be
used in such densely populated areas and
that is where apparently now the United
States they are drawing uh the red line
it is it is still unclear you know how
much this actually weighs on Israel how
much impact that has how much uh the
military has weapons of these kinds and
its stockpile but it's a very clear red
line that the United States are drawing
here and Tanya after months and months
of truce talks are we any closer on that
front well there very mixed messages
coming out of Kio and not much coming
out of K here these past days and it's
still unclear how the mediators are
matching those uh different narratives
that we've been seeing here in the past
days Hamas had said on Monday night that
they're agreeing to an agreement and the
Israeli uh negotiators had said well
this is not the agreement uh that we are
agreeing we have agreed to so we
understand they're still uh talking but
there's a lot of pressure here in Israel
especially uh uh from the families and
from the supporters of those who want to
see those remaining hostages uh being
released because every other week
There's news of another hostage uh that
was killed uh in in Gaza so there's a
lot of pressure public pressure on prime
minister Benjamin Nano to move forward
with a deal but he also has a lot of
pressure within his cabinet from the far
right constituent mainly to move forward
with the rafar operation and part of
that deal is meant to be more aid for
civilians how much is getting through
right
now well the situation is unbearable uh
for people the Israeli Army had uh
ordered people in the east of rafar to
evacuate already on Monday and we
understand that many thousands of people
are on the Move also those who are not
in these areas because there's fear that
this would you know this operation would
widen to other parts of rafar what has
happened also in the north you see Heavy
air bombardment and then tanks are
moving in we're hearing from eight
agencies that already um you know fuel
is not coming in as rafar is Clos
there's also a big question mark about
what's happening at Kum Shalom the other
Crossing with Israel that had been
closed after a mortal attack on Sunday
but had been reopened officially but
eight agencies saying uh nothing is
coming in so for people there it's a
very very very desperate situation thank
you for bringing us up today Tanya in
Jerusalem